Dear young people, today in the church
we commemorate Saint Joseph the Worker.
Today is also Labor Day.
Work is not a punishment, but rather the
purpose of our existence and our lives.
Because if you look at the first
pages of the Holy Scripture, God gives
us the command to work, to create.
However, among the seven deadly
sins, there is one sin called what?
The last one of these seven is sloth.
So, if the Lord has given us the
grace to work, and many today desire
an easy life, a comfortable luxury,
when you open social media, everyone
seems to be living the high life.
But no one is working.
I warn you, young people.
So, is it in your hearts to become
something overnight, to earn, to be rich,
or do you do everything for the glory
of God, for the greater glory of God?
A dangerous trend being imposed
on you today is that you are
not very interested in work.
When I say work, what do I mean?
Not just jobs in some company.
We can talk about the spirit of
laziness, the sin of laziness
that extends to our entire life.
Spiritual, let's say material,
and let's also say aesthetic.
How many people have neglected their lives
due to laziness, whether financially,
spiritually, or even their appearance?
But how many of you young
people today even take this sin
seriously, and it is very evident.
Now, look at this.
If you go to see when Jesus speaks in
the 25th chapter of one of the Gospels,
He talks about the end of the world
and that He will come to separate those
on the left and those on the right.
And those who will be on the left will
go to hell, while those on the right
will go to the kingdom of heaven.
And I find that very interesting.
The criteria for those who will
go to hell are the same as for
those who will go to heaven.
Jesus tells them a parable: When
I was hungry, you did this for me.
When I was thirsty, you did this for me.
When I was in prison, you did this for me.
So he says, you on the right who have
done this, will go into eternal life.
However, he says, calling those
on the left, when I was hungry you
didn't give me food, when I was in
prison, when I was thirsty, and so on.
So he says that we will be judged by
what we haven't done, and many things
today we don't do out of laziness.
Just look at our prayers.
We don't feel like going to church,
we don't feel like praying, we
don't feel like doing good deeds.
So much is missed out of laziness.
And here it says that many will end
up in hell because they missed out
or were too lazy to do something.
So, there are many today who, in any
area you look at, are doing things
half-heartedly or are negligent.
If you have a job at a company, if
you are in a church, if you have a
role in the church, if you are part
of a church community, and you are
doing things only mediocrely, that
also falls into the category of sin.
If you are negligently doing the
tasks you are responsible for,
it is also a category of sin.
Today, as we remember Joseph the
Worker, Joseph who is, in general, Saint
Joseph, an example to all husbands.
So, Joseph was selfless.
He didn't work for himself, think
for himself, or fight for himself.
He dedicated his life to Mary and Jesus.
But what examples do we have today
of many men, many fathers who
should be leaders and selflessly
give themselves to their families?
Where are they?
If we look at the example of Saint
Joseph's life, he selflessly gave and
sacrificed himself for others out of love.
And today we have modern families,
modern husbands, modern Josephs, who
will send everything to the house,
money and all, but they are not there.
There is no father, no husband.
And the Lord requires that
everything we do, we do out of love.
And that is why Saint
Joseph is an example to us.
Not to turn things towards ourselves.
And believe me, laziness brings
great disorder into our lives.
And you know what's even sadder?
That many people admit they are lazy.
Every third confession we hear starts
with all those spiritual dramas,
about how they would like to change
their life, but then when they
leave, everything stays the same.
Well, it will stay the same
if you don't snap out of it.
If you don't decide to stop being lazy.
And why do many people publicly
admit that they are lazy?
Precisely so that they are tolerated.
So that no one expects them to change.
"I am lazy." Look, some people
don't work their entire lives.
They do nothing at work, nothing for their
spirituality, nothing for their family.
They are lazy, set in their ways,
and they don't just admit it.
They don't.
It's a psychological fact that
they admit it publicly so that you
don't expect anything from them.
And we, as a society, come to
terms with and accept such people,
saying, you know, he's lazy,
don't count on him for anything.
But we forget that this is categorized
as one of the seven deadly sins.
And it brings a lot of disorder.
It's fascinating to me, when we talk about
spirituality, how lazy we Christians are.
And that's why we stay silent.
Don't seek changes in spiritual
life in the church if you're
too lazy to lift a finger.
Prayer is hard for you, getting up is
hard, reading the Bible is hard, going to
Mass is hard, everything is hard for you.
Then admit that you are lazy.
And not just any lazy,
but spiritually lazy.
Sometimes I see it in churches, and
you can tell someone had to force
them to come, whether it was their
grandmother, wife, or husband.
You can see it on their face in church,
they don't want to open their mouth, they
don't want to sing, they don't want to be
there, they can’t wait for it to be over.
And that is the spirit of laziness.
And what can God do for us in that state?
Nothing.
There's a simple truth when you
see how people look, especially
if you can enter their space.
Because the space says a
lot about our spirituality.
What is your house like, your
room, not just your nails.
It's not about what we show on the
outside, but what your house is like.
If in your room, the room where
you live, young man or young woman,
or any of us, there is disorder,
your spirituality is no better.
If it's normal for you to look at that
table where you can't put anything down
because it's cluttered with everything,
including bread, if your room is chaotic,
what kind of spirit can settle there?
There is no ventilation.
It reflects our inner state.
That's the plain truth.
When people neglect themselves physically,
and then someone complains, "I'm alone,
no one wants me." Well, who will want you?
Get yourself together, for God's sake.
The spirit of laziness,
I won't wash my hair.
When I see young men coming to
church in tracksuits, come on,
you're going to church, not the gym.
You couldn't spare five minutes for God's
house to dress up and come to church
looking decent, not in a tracksuit.
You can see it all.
That's why I say we project
what's inside us, what's important
to us, through our appearance.
You can see it all clearly.
Now, you see, everything
If you look at laziness, it's very clear.
King Solomon notes that the one
who is negligent in his work is
a brother to the one who wastes.
Saint Paul goes even further.
Saint Paul says that the one who
does not want to work should not eat.
Should not eat.
How ridiculous is it today that
people in Croatia complain that
they don't have jobs, that this
and that, how is there no work?
But we are lazy, saying there are no jobs.
How do foreigners find jobs
in Croatia, but we don't?
Because we are lazy.
But why am I bringing this up?
There's one thing we Croatians do.
We would rather say that life
in Croatia is a disaster.
I watched an interview the other day, and
all the young people were talking about
Croatia as if it were a chaotic country.
No future, better salaries elsewhere,
we can't find jobs, maybe it's
this way, maybe it's that way.
Let's compare the second picture,
how foreigners can find work.
Either we are lazy or we spend
the whole day crocheting, or we
are playing games and doing other
things, letting time pass by.
So, work makes sense to
others, but not to us.
Should we call it by its real
name, that we are a bit lazy?
There's a good quote if
you go to Proverbs 22:13.
A line from the proverb goes like this:
The sluggard says, "There is a lion
outside! I will be killed in the public
square!" So, the sluggard says, "There is
a lion outside! I will be killed in the
public square!" The sluggard is justifying
not going outside because of the lion.
It would be more accurate to say,
"The coward is afraid to go outside
because there is a lion." What does
this have to do with being a sluggard?
So, we see what he's doing.
He's looking for an excuse.
He won't go outside to work because
then there's that feeling of fear.
But the saying starts with "the
sluggard says." So, the problem is
that many times we invent different
circumstances to avoid working.
Different circumstances to avoid
working on ourselves spiritually,
materially, or in any other way.
And that's not good.
That won't help us grow.
We are called, as I said, work is a gift.
We are called to create, to strive, to
fight, to appreciate, not to be lazy.
And when you look at it, our
motivation should be that everything
we do, we do for the glory of God.
That God is glorified.
We must not be motivated by personal
laziness, money, or a comfortable life.
Because we can't all achieve that.
Some have ordinary jobs, some have
serious ones, some this, some that,
but whatever we do, it's important
that it's for the glory of God.
Sirach 33:23 calls us to be the
best in everything we do and says
this: "In all your works be the
master, and do not let your honor be
stained." The saints tell us this.
And whatever you do, whether in
word or deed, do it all in the name
of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks
to God the Father through him.
Remember David when he killed Goliath.
Overnight, he became a national hero.
His rise to fame was instant
when he killed Goliath.
The whole nation bowed
to him, giving thanks.
Do you think David truly achieved
that moment when he took the
sling and killed Goliath?
What you young people see today on social
media, when you scroll through all those
beautiful social networks, as I do,
everyone wants quick success overnight.
Everyone suddenly wants
to get rich and be on top.
It's sad that many people advertise
themselves cheaply to become
popular and earn something.
I call that modern begging.
Tap, tap.
Those of you who follow TikTok know
what it means in a live stream.
Tap, tap.
It means donate.
So, it's easier for me to spend hours
saying tap, tap, i.e., donate to
me, than to actually get a real job.
Isn't it a bit strange, dear girls
and boys, when you see on social
media, people your age, young men
and women, boasting about apartments,
cars, luxurious outings, and travels?
How, my dear, can you achieve
that at 19-20 years old?
How?
For which company do you
work, for which father?
Or are you in some political party?
How?
Tell me.
What does that mean?
That it's all a lie.
That they are just lazy people
who earn money in a simple,
sneaky, somewhat cheap way.
I won't comment on how, but I'm
telling you this to let you know
not to dream about such things.
It's a lie.
The right path is to be like Saint Joseph.
The man was a carpenter, he didn't
reject his job, he valued his work,
and through such hard manual physical
labor, he provided for his family.
He didn't dream of unattainable
dreams but did what he was capable of.
So why are you, dear young people,
being pushed to dream of some grand
ideal life when you know you're not
in the category that can have it?
And then you enter a state of
frustration, disappointment, and give up.
But why?
You are all healthy and normal
enough to earn a living and
not be a burden to anyone.
Why do you need to have the best car,
the best apartment, or anything else?
Work within your capabilities and limits.
Understand?
Don't fall for that false propaganda;
appreciate what you are capable of.
Even if it's physical
labor, whatever it may be.
And why do I keep coming back to David?
He didn't achieve fame overnight just
because he slung a stone and killed
Goliath, becoming a national hero.
Let's go back and think
about how he succeeded.
And how can you, as a young girl
or a young boy, succeed as well?
David was sent to tend the sheep.
He didn't learn the skill of
slingshot shooting overnight.
Have you ever held a slingshot as a child?
We did, we played with slingshots as kids.
But the more we played, the
more we became, let's say,
capable of hitting the target.
He was tending the sheep, alone
with the sheep in some desert.
No audience, no protection,
no one to monitor your work,
what you are doing there.
But David was tending the sheep.
And you will find in the Holy Scriptures
where a few times a bear and other
animals came and attacked the sheep.
What could David say in that situation?
As a boy.
Mind you, David is a boy, tending
sheep, and when a bear or some
dangerous animal comes, he could
say, well, it won't economically
ruin me if it takes one or two sheep.
You know, it specifically says
that he rolled up his sleeves and
fought with wild animals barehanded.
So, as a boy, he was already
practicing something, fighting.
He used a sling, physically fought
with wild animals so that one day,
with that experience, he could
stand before Goliath and kill him.
Understand?
That's why you can't skip this
part in your job, career, or work.
It starts with small things.
You practice with small things first.
You can't immediately jump
to being a national hero.
The greatest wealth, but you go.
And what is even more interesting here?
Well, David didn't know what awaited him.
And what he did, he could
have even let a sheep die.
No one would have seen
it, no one was present.
But no, as I said earlier.
He did everything for
the greater glory of God.
Because remember Psalm 23.
The Lord is my shepherd.
David surely had that in mind, Lord my
shepherd, I am doing this job to guard
the flock, I will defend it as much as
I know and can with all my strength.
There is no reward, no audience,
no applause, he is alone with the
sheep, but the Lord sees everything,
the Lord is my shepherd, Psalm 23.
That's it, my dears, when we learn
to work and handle tasks, things, and
situations like that, always keeping
in mind that God is watching us.
Practice in small things.
Then God will perform
a miracle through you.
God will be glorified through
you if you view things this way.
Strive to make it so.
Saint Joseph is a role model for many.
Why else is he a role model?
He was obedient.
Obedient to God.
Remember all those situations when he
was told to marry Mary, then when he was
told to take Mary and Jesus and flee,
and then when he was told to return.
To be obedient.
To be obedient to what God wants from you.
And that's why it's very important
for us to examine ourselves as
well, but do we listen to God?
Or do we listen to our feelings of
laziness, not wanting to do anything?
When I see you young people, 25, 30
years old, not wanting to play sports,
not wanting to do this or that, as
they used to say in my village, when I
see how you walk, you know right away.
If you've already lost the strength for
life, for the fight, if you don't feel
like doing anything now, when will you?
When will you then?
If we have now settled for
mediocrity and don't care about
things, that's really not good.
And that spirit of laziness
permeates all areas of our lives.
Through everything.
I said, from the spiritual to
the physical, to whatever you
want, and that's not good.
Let's guard against
the spirit of laziness.
If you feel lazy, if you don't feel like
doing something, whether it's fighting for
life, praying spiritually, or whatever.
I always say, look, engagement
in the church for God.
When I say engagement in the
church, I don't mean you're doing
me a favor, but that we're all
collectively striving for God's cause.
People don't feel like it.
People don't feel like coming
to rehearsals, people don't
feel like practicing, people
don't feel like serving.
They don't.
And then we all become sluggish.
And these days we've been hearing
about the revelation that says
you're either cold or hot.
If you're lukewarm, I'll
spit you out of my mouth.
So we fight.
Saint Joseph was a worker.
A worker, he was a leader, and now I'm
especially addressing you men, these
are two very important things, to be
a worker, but also to be a leader.
Not a leader like today's leaders,
but a leader in your family,
to take care of your family.
Well, you men can't just sit back; our
role is to provide, to work, to fight.
Especially for the family.
We men can't allow ourselves
to get married and then let
the woman carry the household.
The woman shouldn't have
to take care of everything.
Fight.
Work.
Start with something.
Stop complaining.
Look, many have fallen into
many sins because of laziness.
Many young people today are
dependent due to laziness.
Dependent on betting shops,
dependent on other things.
All because of laziness.
Remember David.
There's even a quote I found somewhere.
So, in 2 Samuel, chapter 11, it says this.
King David, who committed a sin out
of laziness, out of unemployment.
It says this, at the beginning of
the next year, at the time when
kings go out to war, David sent Joab
and his men, all of Israel, to war.
So, he should have gone too, but
he stayed at home and sent others.
And then, in the meantime, the story
continues: after he had breakfast
and completed his morning hygiene
routine, he was walking on the
terrace and saw another man's wife.
He called her to him, and they sinned.
Then, to cover it all up, he
wanted to kill her husband and
put him on the front line to die
so that it wouldn't be discovered
that he had sinned with his wife.
All out of laziness and boredom.
But if he had gone to war
with the soldiers he sent, he
wouldn't have committed this sin.
How many times do saints warn us
that if we don't keep ourselves busy,
the devil will find work for us.
That's why I tell you that many addictions
in young people develop out of boredom.
If you don't work, if you laze
around, what else will you
do but start playing games or
binge-watching series out of boredom?
Then a bit of gambling, a bit of betting,
a bit of this, a bit of that, and
addiction unconsciously sucks you in.
Addiction unconsciously
takes control of you.
Believe me, a large number of young
people today have problems with this.
So fight and look for a job.
Get active in every area.
Do something for your paycheck, and
especially, I want to emphasize,
for this spiritual laziness.
I see the mess here.
When I see how much disorder and
chaotic situations some people
have in their hearts because of
that laziness, it's unbelievable.
Let me emphasize one thing.
Anyone who feels that spiritual laziness,
don't dramatize, don't say "I don't feel
like it" and so on, but start cleaning.
Start cleaning, don't brag about
it, just start cleaning your heart.
Just like you have a physical room that
needs to be cleaned and organized, a
closet, organize your heart as well.
There's no use in complaining.
So, against laziness, the only effective
remedy can be a decision: today I
start cleaning my heart, my thoughts.
Clean, resolve.
If you keep saying "I don't feel like
it, I don't feel like it," then be quiet.
But the only cure is to start
working and cleaning in that area.
Well, we are fighting against
the spirit of laziness.
And to you, dear young people, I
open your eyes and encourage you to
fight against laziness in every area.
How beautiful it is, what joy you get
when you create, when you earn something
through hard work, and when you fight,
when you achieve spiritual growth.
Just look at spirituality.
It's normal for you young people who go
to church, while many are out barbecuing
and enjoying themselves today, you have
come to church again, which I appreciate.
So, in a way, it shows that you care
about nurturing your spiritual life.
Because you can have a barbecue anytime.
It's so important to fight and not
let that spirit of laziness take over.
Otherwise, you'll remain sluggish, and
many of you are at a stage where in a
year or two or three, you'll be getting
married and will need to support others.
And if you are the remedy but
haven't sorted yourself out yet,
and then you have children, a wife,
and other worries, it won't work.
But you see, when you are spiritually
engaged, like you young people here in the
church, you fight, a special grace comes.
A special joy comes.
It's not that we are
suffering, to be clear.
When we oppose laziness, it's not that
we are victims and it's hard for us.
Here you are, young in the church, you
fight, you live in purity, oh poor you.
We do everything for the
greater glory of God.
So, it's nice when you create
something, work on something,
when you've put in the effort.
And this is what's important, what
the Lord gave to the first humans in
the Book of Genesis: the duty to work,
to create, to manage, to even name
the animals, because God trusts us.
And besides that faith that God has in
us, let's also have faith in ourselves.
Don't declare yourself incapable.
That's dangerous.
When someone declares themselves
incapable, you're not incapable.
You just need a little push.
You just need a little nudge.
And to you, parents, what can I say?
Don't create a luxurious environment and
nest for your children to grow up in.
Let them struggle, don't create invalids.
Don't create invalids so that your
son, at 35 or 40 years old, still
lives with you and hasn't lifted a
finger because you won't let him.
"I'll iron for you, I'll cook for
you, I'll work for you"—that's not
love, you're making him incapable.
Let him fight, be his support whenever
he needs it, but this trend of "I
struggled, I worked hard, so my child
doesn't have to"—that's the most
dangerous thing you can do to your child.
You're making it so they don't
know how to fight, so they
become sluggish and average.
Don't do that, you won't go wrong,
always support him from behind,
but let him create on his own.
Don't give him everything on
a silver platter, that's it.
That's why we lack generations
today who fight, who think
outside the box, who strive.
Because if someone is always standing
behind you, you will never grow up.
Thank God that someone from your family
can help, but don't, you will make
him, believe me, incapable of life.
Amen.